    
     
           
           
       
     
         

36 nores,

paullulum u being omitted before the first l and the r assimi-
hiltegaiiiigestemla -- stella.—viverem ε subj.: giving the opinion

“etiam lum: is used to express the words of Catilina, not
those of Cicero.

¹⁴duo equites: according to Cic. (Pro Sulla, 18, 52) one was
C. Cornelius: Sallust (Cat. C. 18) mentions the Senator L.
Vargunteius as the other.

l¹⁶qm'-—-liberareut: “to sree you from the sear you had :'' que-:-
ta es ut.

illa ipsa nocte : these knights were to pay their intended visit
in the morning, where the Roman magistrates and distinguished
men held their audiences and received their clients.

¹⁷lectuloz the diminutive here has scarcely any force. There
rnay be a. slight reference to its comfort ι “ my dear bed.'’

ἓ 10.—1vixdzmz—dimiss0: ‘⁴ when your meeting was hardly
as yet broken uD.''

, Ccmzperi: Cicero gained his knowledge from Curius and
Fulvia (Sall. Cat. C. 28). According to Merivale‚ Cicero used
comperio when he was wont to indicate his knowledge of laem,
though afraid of revealing the sources os his information, The
word does not always have this force.

²salutatmn : supine after a verb of motion. What different

        
 
       
      
        
         
         

ways of expressing a purpose in Latin? ele
⁸mane: another form is mani: cp. luci, lteri, locatives. th<
qd temporis: sor partitive genitive : H. 397, note 5. ἱ Ιῖῑῖῑ
CHAPTER V. th¹
ἓ 11.—¹qzme—sint z “ since these facts are so :'' osten used to
sum up a chain os facts founded on evidence.
²perge quo coepisti, scil. pergere: “ proceed as you have begun. '' ’Μ
Conjugate pawgerff’. te
desiderant: “ feel the loss of.'’—-desidera7·e, to feel the loss of g
an object os love or sympathy: hence “to yearn aiter ;’' re· ei
quit-ere: to feel the loss of a thing, as an act of the understand· c]
ing.
³⁸2⁸ minus = si non.. construe z .ςὶ minus (educis omnes, educ) b
quam, plurimos (educere potes). t,

‘dummodo--intersit z cp. Plutarch (Cicero 16) z “ and Cicero
arising ordered him to leave the city; sor while he himself

