46 noras,

“quanta—impendeat: ⁴‘ what a storm ot unpopularity threa—
tens me, if not at present, on account os the memory of your
crimes being fresh, still in the future time.’' recenti=memoria ι

abl. of cause. in posteritatem εἰη posterum tempus. im-
pendeat : indirect question.

fised—mjungyacur ι “ but (the unpopularity you threaten) wil·
lingly will Ι undergo (literally‚ pays me well) provided the loss
wlnch you sorbode is confined to mysels and does not involve
danger to the State.’' tanti: genitive of price. The subject
of est is invidiam istam milti impendere.

''ut--ut-utz these three clauses are explained by the three
beginning with auc, aut, cent. pudor = αἱδώς; “a sense os
shame, or modesty.”

§23.-¹c·onflare: a metaphor taken from metals: literally,

“to smelt together: '' hence “to heap upon.'’

²recta, scil, vm : ‘⁶' straightway.''

‘'viat—vix: note the emphatic positions ε “ hard will it be sor
me to bear the weight of the unpopularity caused by you, if
you go into exile by the order of the consul,'’-sermones: ‘⁶ the
censure t '' cp. our expression “to be the talk of the town.''

feceris ς see note 4, ξ 6.

teni—mavis: “but if, however, you prefer to consult my
praise and glory.” lans -fsloria are originally derived from
the same root cLU‚ “to hear : '² laus = (c)lau(rl)s: [storia. =
clu-oria.

⁵e.1:.s¹ulta—-lc1trocinio z “ triumph in your impious bandit war.’'
latro: properly a mercenary soldier who serves for pay
(λατρείαᾙ afterwards, “a brigand.'' impio: as being against
his native land : cp. pietas erya patriam, “patriotism.’'

g24-—1qztamquam: see note 1, ξ 22. invitem: rhetorical
question: H. 529.

2qui-arn1at5·? “to wait sor you arms near Forum Amelium.’
αιί before the name os towns denotes (1) directi0n3 (2) prox-
imity, as in this passage 'l'owns were called Fora. by the
Romans, where the praetor held his circuits for administering
justice and where markets were established. The town men-
tioned here was in Etruria between the Armenta (Fiora) and
Marta, not from the sea. It is now called Monte Alto. It
derived its name from one Aurelius, who built the V ἱα Aurelia
from Rome to Pisa.

praestolarentur: the word praestolari, is “to wait for '' said
of a subordinate who persorms some services sor a superior.

9

 

