Nomas, 27

   

- here that Augustus built a splendid mansion ε hence our word
, palace from the residence of the emperor built-on the Palatium·
. In times os danger the Palatium, one of the most important
ς military posts of the city, was occupied by a guard· Originally

the word meant the “feeding place ²„ ¹0⁰t pal’ pascere: cp·

· ·»’-.· Pales, Palilia. Varro derives it srom pal, ‘⁶ to Wander ²„ cp·

palor, It may have been the ‘⁶ common '’ sor cattle in early

days. W'giliae: under the republic, ΟΠ emergencieS, the nium·

, ἐς viri capitales, aediles or tribuni plebis acting as a kind of police ap-

3³¹5 f-MJS

,ἳῑῗεξξῆὴ lascivia . . . repente omnes tris-titia invasit. —bonorum emnium .·

Sem} . ³ , with bonus: cp. ἀγαθός, often used in the sense of “ patriotic,'’
, andem , > , opposed to malus civis, κακός t “ unpatriotic.’'—locus: the

eludet' Senate was usually convened on the Kalends, N ones and Ides of
, to—n'} each month, and the meeting usually held in the Curia Hostilia.
·f. sub· ζςξε Extraordinary meetings (senatus indictus) as the present one
14.6.L were convened in some temple, or other place consecrated by

152, the augur-s. The present meeting was held in the temple of
ω {ltfflffssigfisstssss’825333132 {tini-‘25:322 ῖῗιίῐῗοιὶὲἓὲἒῖῑῖῗιὲῗὲῗὰ

g furor there as well as from its position.-ora vultusque: the former
of the denotes the natural and habitual state, as expressed by the
dmg :” 4ξ’ mouth and the lower part ol the sace ε while the latter indicates
nptuous · the temporary and changing state, as expressed by the motion
ζ of the eye and brow.
term of v ss‘ Sconstrictam-vides .· ‘⁴ do you not see that your conspiracy
hence, β has already come within the privity of all these ?’' literally, “ is
:ted by- held bound by.'' Orelli distinguishes between non and nonne
in direct questions, Where non is used, the speaker, sure
,udacsty of his opinion, does not heed the answer of the opponent:
gording ³ where nonne is used, the speaker expects and wishes that the
»ne and person questioned will agree with him—constrictam teneri: the
ς quem metaphor is taken from chaining a wild beast to which he here

compares the conspiracy.

⁹pr0xima .· this speech was delivered November 8th: so nox
proxima would be the night of 7th τ nox superior, the night of
the 6th‚ also called nox prior, § 8. On this occasion they were
at the house of M. Porcius Laeca. What they did on the nox

:⁸ 5·
s ε·
0 a
υΤ Ω..

›thing proxima we are not informa—egeris, fueris, convocaveris,
g, ,hig ceperas: subjunctive of dependent question: H. 529, Ι.

lg, the 1⁰nostram .· distinguish nostrum uses partitively and nostri
2 posi· used possessively.

ra).—- §2.—¹vt‘vit? immo vero: Cicero osten connects a word by
[t was putting that word in the form of a question with or without

 

