es—
ead·

, to
ses ε

rd en

s ot
rins·

ining
crede
ἰ) οη

{view
’ (tibi

‚dded
Cp.
ently

is of
le of
Hav-
asily
ante
ttion

rela-

:iouS
OUS,

 

Norae. 33

the former being more poetical and explained by the latter,
which is the more common.

⁵mcm——‹lie⁸? ‘⁴ was Ι, O Catiline, ignorant not merely of an
attempt so enormouS‚ so wicked, so surpassing belief, but, a
thing which is more to be wondered at, os the day ?''-mefallic:
cf. latet me, λανθάνει με.

Quodam—Novembres ε “ that you had fixed the 28th October
for the slaughter of the nobles.” The construction is ιίι diem
quintum ante K alendas Novembres. Predetermination ol future
time is often expressed by in with acc.: as in diem posterum
senatum convocavit, not ‘⁴ he summoned the Senate on the next

day, '' but “sor the next day.'’

'‘optimatz'um: is the only word, not a proper name, in—at,
that makes the gen. pl. iii—ium. Roma: Give rules sor the
construction of the names of towns.

Ssm' conservandi: sm' like nostri, vestri is not a gen. pl. but a
gen. sing. osan adj. used collectively ancl abstractly : “not sor
sels-preservation :'' Madvig, 297, b. c. ε 417. ,

9νερνίηιεηιιόνηυι : here used in the sense of impcde'enclmum :''
“ of preventing your plans being carried out.'' This is probably
a rhetorical flourish‘ on the partos Cicero, as no such fact is
mentioned by Sallust. Among those who fleu, aecorcling' to
Plutarch, was M. Crassus. num— dtkeous ! “ Can vou deny
that on that very day, beset by the guards I had placed, by my
watchfnlness‚ you could take not one step against the state, when
on the departure of the others you, nevertheless‚ expres-sed your-
self satisfied with the murder osus who remained?''—discessu
ceterorum z the ablative here supplies the place of a participial
abl. absol. —nostra——caede—qm‘: the relative is made to reser to
an antecedent implied in nostra: H. 445, 6‚—qmcm : is often
used by Cicero in the impf. indic. when the bare n‹›ti0n of time
or ‹·f continuance is to be expressed.-—rem‹znsissemus: virtual
oblique narrative z hence the subjunctive.

d.§8.—¹quid:' “further'': lit. “what shall 1 say ?’' scil.
ccam.

²te—0ccupaturum: “that you would anticipate us in seizing
Praeneste in an attack by night on the first of November.''
With occupare: cp. φθάνειν : no other writer mentions this fact.
-tpst'sz ipse denotes exactness in tempora] expressions ε triginta
ipsi dies, ‘⁶ exactly thirty days.'' ·

³sensistisne= nonne sensistis: see note ῐ, ἕ 7, above.

‘praesicliurm a guard in a general sense ε custodiae, watches on
the< wall ε zviffl'liae, night watches.

