ζ you
hear
ν todo

par·
ding

ber,
= ecs..

am
you
lego

the
t on εἰ
= ven, ι
ange

kers'
atlon
ισιν 2

*ena-

μή ..aa >w1exssaammam-maswazmw , <vm-wa... ⁵·‘¹'*'·*‘-'u⁵'·²·⁴³r-fe'⁴

the
ised
ilve

ma·
my
tm·
un-

 

xores. 35

⁴irz—cons1'lio z ‘⁴ in this most venerable and respectable assem·
bly of the whole world.’' The term sanctus applied to the senate
may refer to the building in which it was convened. The usual
distinction between consilium and concilium, that the former
means advice, plans‚ while the latter means an assemblage, with
regard to those who compose it, does not hold good. The roots
of these words are different, consilium ε from coit, sed, to sit : cp.
sedes, solium, ὲδος ; sor the change of d to l z cp. δάκρυ, lacrima ;

olelre, alege—concilium z con, cal, to summon z cp. Kalendae,
ca are, κα εῖν.

ὅραὶ-οοῃίεεηιε “ (are men so nefarious) as to plan the destruc·
tion of every one of us, and the ruin of this city and further of
the whole world. ’'-—qai = tales tta—adeo ε literally, “up to
this point :’' then, “ in fact.'’

‘sententiam νοῃο : supply hos from the preceding. Sententiam
&090 is said of the presiding magistrate who, in proposing a
senatu-s consultum, asked imlividually the will of the senators.

'‘vulnero z by nientionin'g their names publicly.

sszgre'tur: resumes (analeptic) the argument referring to the
question, num rogare audes? Catiline had lest this unanswered.
Having been lutet-rupted by the outbreak of his indignation, the
οιῖιῑὲι· now returns to the doings of the conspirators at the house
o aeca.

⁹d1stril1uestae· ε Sallust (C. 27) informs us that C. Manlius was
sent to Faesulae, and the adjoining territory of Etruria ε
Septimius, into the Picene territory x C. Julius, into Apulia.

¹⁰statuisti—-placeretz scil: locum ε “ you appointed the place
to which it was agreed on that each should set out :'’ For sub·
Junetive in placeret, see H. 529, Ι.

ῙῙιίεΙιεξίείί-εᾰηεινεε; “ you picked out those whom you were
to leave at Rome, whom you were to take with you.'’ Sallust
(Cat. C. 43) says that statilius and Gabinius were to set fire to
the city, and Cethegus was to assassinate Cicero, and Lentulus
to superintend the geneml massacre.

¹²discripsisti z discribo is used where the fundamental notion is
to map out, plan, arrange, put in order, as distribuere, dividere,
disponere: describo is to write down, to compose. Sallust (Cat.
C. 43) says that the conspirators were to f1re twelve (Plutarch
says a hundred) parts of the city at one and the rime time.
For discripsisti z cs. Cic. Pro Sulla, 8 z Tam Co :Vina dies
exurendi tum caeteris manendi conditio, tum discriptio totam per
orbem caedis atque incendiorum constituta est.

¹⁸paullulum-—moo-ae= “that you still had even now a slight
cause os delay.'’ Paullulus is a dual diminutive sor paurululus=

