    
      
   
           
       
         
    

NOTES.

  

CHAPTER 1.

ἓ 1.--¹quosque--nostra? “ How far, then, Catiline, will you ‘³
trample upon our patience ?'' The abrupt opening of the speech ,
shows the seelings of the orator whose indignation was naturally
aroused when the conspirator dared to appear in the Senate ’ ’ζ’ ’
after being declared a public enemy (hostis patriae).—tandem .· ’
“pray :'' cp. δῆτα. —abutere .· a future, as shown by eludet,
jactabit. Cicero prefers the more poetic termination—re to—ris
in the imperf. and lut. indic. and in the pres. and irnpf. subj.
pass. In the preS. indie. he rarely uses it. Madvig. ξ 1146.—
nostra .· Cicero includes the senators and Consuls.

²etiam .· “ still‚’' belongs to quamdiu.

3[ανον iste: note the energy imparted by personifying furor
and audacia—iste is strictly a pronoun demonstrative os the
second person z iste locus, “ the place where you are standing :'’
ista verba .· “the words you utter.'’ It osten had a contemptuous › ’
meaning in Cicero's orations.

⁴eludet: “will turn us into mockery:'' a gladiatorial term of ’ ζ’·
avoiding a thrust by the rapid movement of the body: hence,
ggssgdglcpftglresceive, and, as here, to mock. A'os is omitted by·

⁵quem—-audacia .· “ to what length will your unbridled audacity
proeeed ?'’-—quem adfinem = quousque or quamdiu. According
to Schultz quousque puts the more general question of time and
degree: quamdiu, the more special question, of time only ι quem
-ad finem .· ol degree only.

{jactabit = insolenter se efferet .· se jactare, “to toss the head
contemptuously,'’ “to walk with a conceited swing.''

''nihilne—moverunt? “ Have the guards nightly stationed
on the Palatine nothing daunted you? Nothing, the sentinels
-of the city3 nothing, the trepidation of the people; nothing,
the thronging together of all patriotic (citizens) ς nothing, this
most impregnable place for convening the Senate ; nothing, the
countenances and looks of these ?'' Observe the emphatic posi-
tion of nihil in the beginning os successive clauses (anaphora).—
Palatii: the Palatine hill was adjacent to the Forum. 1twas

           
         
       
         
     

