    
   
    
   
   
  
  
          
     
   
         
         
       
       

34 nores,

⁵nihil-nilzil, nihil ε see note 7, ξ 1. “There is nothing you
do, nothing you plan, nothing you think whichI do not hear
only, but also see or clearly pereeive.'' Some read non modo
for non modo non, which the senses requires.

CHAPTER IV.

6tandem: see note 1, ξ 1. The orator implies by this par·
tiele the sulness os his knowledge.

noctem illam supertorem : “the events on the night preceding
the last :'’ i.e., the events on the night of the 6th November,
when the meeting was held at the house of M. Porcius Laeca.
—illam here does duty for the definite article in English.

&hm—respublisae: “ You shall presently perceive that I am
much more actively watchful sor the safety of the state than you
are sor its destructioffl—intelltgres ε what compounds of—lego
have lema· in the perfect ?—-acrius?

”dicoz this passage is executed with fine skill. At first the
orator states the fact clearly and briefly. He notes the effect on
the conspirator and calls sor an answer z after no reply is given,
Cicero goes into details.

¹⁰pri0re nocte: “ on the night preceding (the last)'' z a change
for superiore nocte. Others say it means initio noctae.

uinter falcarios, scil, opifices ε ·'‘ through the scythe makers'
street :” a street in Rome deriving its name from the occupation
of its inhabitants. Cp. Isocr. Areopag. ἓ 48: ἐν ταῖς αὑλητρίσινι
Livy, 35, 43 : inter lignarios “ in the woodcutters’ street.''

”in—domum ε is the preposition necessary?

¹⁸c0mplures : Sallust (Cat. 17) gives the names ofeleven sena·
tors who were present on this occasion.

“amentiaez distinguish amentia and dementia.
¹⁵c0nvincam z “ 1 will prove it.”

ξ 9. ¹ubinam gentium sumus Σ This phrase is very much the
same as ours, ‘⁴ where in the world are we ? ’' It is osten used
in rhetorical writings and ir· the comic poets. Por the partitive
genitive, see H. 397, 4.

²l1ic‚ lu'c ε Epizeuxie: note the emphatic repetition.

⁸patrcs conscripti ε said to be sor patres et conscripti. The sena·
tors were called patres. In the wars of the early republic many
were killed. To fill the place os those slain some were sum·
moned (conscripti.) Hence the original senators-those sum-
moned—ware addressed as patres et conscripti ε afterwards the et
was omitte .

, 5 ..m-‘ww w-

·“vssvaem- ᾰὲπ-ῑὶὓψωμη ..a .-‹=—.-1w„.v.;52—:,.3‡s2?a=

ἐξερῶ, v . ‚t- ,ΛΤ-Ἴ *{.·,22,'⁴’32⁴=.'*‹13·“‘ f'u‘. ,, ,

 

