ds'' ε ει

(fully
ssured)
tes an

os an

J uppi-
rated,

ind of
ed by

tabis

PROPER NAMES.

Α

Ahala, -ae : m.: Caius Servilius Ahala was master of the horse to the
dictator Cincinnatus. 439 B.O. Spurius Maelius, one or the Equites,
bought corn at a low rate and distributed it gratuitiously to the oor.
By this he gained the favour ot the plebeians, but incurre the
enn1ity of the atticians. When he was summoned by the dictator
to appear on t e charge of aiming at royal power, he refused, and
Ahala, with an armed band, rushed into the crowd where he was
standing, and slew him. Cicero often praises the deed of Ahala, but
it is doubtful whether it can be defended.

Ε

EtrfirIa, -ae: L: a large district oi Italy, lying west and north ol the
Tiber. This part of Italy was generally favorable to Catiline. In it
were Faesulae, and Pistoria, where Catiline zell, 62 Re.

Ρ

Faesulae, farum: t: now Fiesole, near Florentia (Florenee), ln Etruria.
Here Catiline raised the standard of rebellion.

Fcrum Aurelium, Feri Aurelii: n.: a town οἱ Etruria, 0¹¹ the
Aurelian way ; now Monte Alto. ’

,Flaccus -1; m.: M. Fulvius Flaccus was charged with the execution οἱ

the Agrarian law of the Gracchi, and aided Tib. Gracchus to gain for
all the Italians the rights oi Roman citizenship. He was cited along
with the consul Opimius to render an account of his conduct with
regat-d to the revolutionary measures then proposed. This he refused
to obey, and was slain along with his eldest son.

Fulvius, -12 m.: see preceding.

G

Gracchus, ·1 :⁹1n.:‡ Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus and Caius Sempro.
nim Gracchus were sons ot Tiberius Sem ironias Gracchus and of
Cornelia, daughter oi Scipio Africanus Μῗέοτ. The object ot both
brothers was—to have the ublic lands divi ed and given to the poor,
by allowing no one to hol more than 500 juyera ot land. The state
was to compensate the wealthy for all the loss. Both brothers fell in
the sedition that arose out ol their revolutionary schemes : Tiberius
in 132 B.C., and Caius in 122 Rc.

i ⁷

l
Itane, -αθε Lx Italy, a country ol Southern Europe.

 

