pursue
ι rdance
ors ''—-
reprime
he had

tuorum
Jexpexe-

’χ’
. 21 ι’·
fr
. ”
9
vl
. :g ἶ
” ἐξ
3³
:⁸
μ,
i
5
ἔ
’Ξ
·
3
ζ
ae

NOTES.

CHAPTER VI.

‘quod—possit: H„ 503, 1.

umora—hominum: “ unconnected with that band os conspira-
tors composed of worthless men ’'—conjuratim used in a con·
crete 1sense: cp. advocatio, servitium. For subjunctive: H„
500, .

Quae-est? “what stain of domestic insamy has not been
branded on your life? '' Distinguish: murz, ηόιᾶ, nimi. The
expression nota domesticae turpitudinis differs in meaning from
privatarum rerum dedecus: the former relates to moral or
immoral domestic life, the latter to all private actions as op-
posed to those that affect a man's public character. Nota is
applied (1) to the brand on cattle ; Virg. Georg. 3, 158 : (2) to
the mark placed on a fugitive slave when retakeu z (3) to the
mark placed by the censor (nota cen-soria) on revising the list
of citizens, opposite the name os the person degraded. Accord-
ing to Plutarch, Catiliue had slain his own brother and murdered
his own son that there might be no obstacle to his marrying
Aurelia Orestilla.

'quod—sama: “what scandal in private life does not cling
to your notorious acts?” Some read infamiae, a dat, after·
haeret, which is sometimes found. Give the different construc-
tions of haerere.

¹⁰quae—-at‘aicz “what act os impurity ever was strange to
your eyeS, what enormit to your hands, what pollution to
your whole body Ρ ”-ἰίὂ“ ο ; licentiousness‚ in a general sense ς
facinus, a bold, daring deed, in a bad sense, unless justified by
some favourable epithet z flayitium, a disgracesul, lustful excess.

”cui-praetulisti? “to what youth, aster you had once en·
tangled him by the allurements of vice, did you not hand either
a dagger to commit some daring deed, or a torch to inflame his
passion?’' adulescentuloz the diminutive is used ir· a depre-
ciatory sense, since many a weak youth was misled by Catiline
(Sallust Cat.. c. 14). facem: the figure refers to the nightly
revels and debauches of Catiline. Slaves carried torches before
their masters at ni ht to show the way. The torch of Catiline
not merely show the way to crimes, but served to inflame the
passions of lust.

§¹4.-¹quid vero? scil, dicam; “further:” lit. “whatv
indeed, shall 1 say?'⁹

'nuper—cumulasti? ’' When lately by the death of your first
wife you had rendered your home empty to eontract a new
marriage, did you not aggravate this crime by committing

 

