simi-
inion

nOt

was
r L.

ut Σ

visit
shed

here
rcl ly

and
used

mg
The

trent

dto

1n.''

s of
7⁵8-
,nd-

lew)

ero
sels

Novas 37

carried on his political contest by words and Catiline by arms,
there must needs be a city wall between them.''

⁵non— sinam ε note the anaphora. Cicero uses three synony-
mous verbs to express the thought that he will not endure the
conductos Catiline under any circumstances. We may trans-
late z “ ἰ’ cannot, will not, shall not endure it.''

finzayna—urbis: “much gratitude is due to the immortal
gods and especially (atque) to this Juppiter Stator, the most
ancient guardian of our city.’' Distingui<÷h qratiam habere, to
feel thanksul x qratias affere, to return thanks in words : qratiam
referre, to show oneself thanqul by deeds. Jupniter obtained
the name Stator because he is said to have stayed the flight of
the Romans when they were hard pressed by thre Sabines. The
place where the ssight was arrested was marked by a temple
vowcd by Romulus at the foot of the Palatine (Livy Ῑ. 12).

'lqzcocl—-effzaessimus : ‘⁴ because we have already escaped so often
a pest so cruel‚ so dreadsul, so ‹langerous to the state ''—toiie·s:
referring to the earlier conspiracy of Catiline which failed.

*Mon—reipublicae : “it must not again and again depend on
one man that the existence of the state should be in peril :'' or,
'⁴ the safety of the state must not be often exposed to danger by
one man.'' A similar expression is found ε Cic. Pro. Rosc.
Amer. 51. 148 ε summa res publica in hujzcs periculo tentatur.

“consa-li eleesynam: in the days of Cicero the consuls were
elected on the 22nd October, but did not formally enter upon
their office till January lst. Between the time of their election

’ and entering upon office they were called consules desiyrtati.

proaeimis comitiis consularibus z referring to Oct. 22nd.

Ῑθίη campo, scil. Marcio ε the consular elections were held in
the Campus Martius, a plain between the city and the Tiber.

”competitore-3: D. Junius Silanus and L. Licinius Murena.

¹²c01wpressi--c0pii5: on the day of the consular elections, we
are mlo„ hy Plutarch, Cicero put on a contos mail and was at-
tende-¹} ¹, ’ν’ the chiet' men of Rome and a great number os youths
to the ε, tmpus Martius. He there threw off his toga and dis-
played liis coar ot mail to show the danger to which he was
exposed. ‘she people were so angry with Catiline that they
chose Murena and Silanus aa· consuls.

¹qutott'escumqtce—obstiti: “as osten as you aimed at my life,
by my own resources did I oppose you τ ” petere is a gladiatorial
term, ‘⁴ to aim a blow at an opponent.’'

1⁴quamquam wldeham: distinguish quamquam, introducing a
maced& fact {ind in good authors used with the indicative

