    
        
       
       
    
 
  
    
 
    
  
 
 
   
     

  

42 Nom-ns.

by the most solemn sentence of those, though they are silent.”
The reference is to the fact that the Senate had declared Catiline
ῧῑιένέεὲξιαξιέειὶε, and had received him with silence on entering

¹¹quid? scil. dicam. We often find quid? quod used by
Cicero in rapid rhetorical questions ι Madvig„ 479, d. obs. 1.

¹²adventu tuo z see note 9, ἕ 7: abl. time.

”ista subsellia ε “the benches near you.’' The seats of the
senators (subsellia) were beneath that os the consul (sella
curulis), which was on a platsorm.

¹⁴‹Juisuerum2 “who have been often destined sor slaughter
by you.’'—tibi: dat. sor abl. with abs = abs te. Distinguish
constituti sunt and constituti suerunt.

stauclam atque inanem: “ completely bare :'' Cicero osten
uses two epithets os nearly the same meaning to emphasize the
‘idea to be conveyed.

¹⁶candem ε see note ι, § 1.

ξ ι7.-Ῑ.ςενυὶ-ανὸἰενανὶεε a fine example of the argument
a fortiori. The Latins call this avnplfficatz'o (Quint. 8, 4, 9),
the Qreeks ἐνθίιμημα, a rhetorical conclusion, drawn from
opposltes.

²¹me hercule: either (1) me Hercules juvet, or (2) me, Hercules,
iuves. We also find me hercules, mehercle, mercule, varieties
*of the same oath. For the tendency to drop 8 final ε cp. Peile
(Greek and Latin Etymology, p. 355).

³isto pacto ε “in the way.”-—ieto here does duty for the article
-or may be = eodem. ’

omnes: the sellow-conspirators are no longer regarded as
citizens by Cicero.

*zm-bem ε scil„ relinquendam.

⁵injuria ε “ without any just cause.’'

“offensum = invisum, odiosum.

''inse-stis: another form is infensis z “ menacing.’'

⁸a9noscas: distinguish aynosco, iynosco, coynosco, recoynoeco,
in meaning.

”dubitas—vitare: when dubito means “to doubt :²² non dubito
is properly construed with quin and the subjunctive, rarely with
the infinitive. But when dubito means “to scruple‚ ' “to
hesitate,'' and the sentence following contained the same sub-
ject, non dubito is generally construed· with the infinitive.

¹⁰mentes sensusque ε ·‘ souls and senses.''

 

  
  

 

