nores· 43

ualiquo ε “to some place or other.’'

1²nunc = νῦν δέ, “ but now, as it is‚” used to contr-ast actual
and imaqined condition.

lssjmndiu-coyitare ε “ and for a long time has it come to the
conclusion that you have been planning nothing but her ruin.’'·-—
nihil = de nulla re .—parricidio = interitu, because patria is
regarded communis parens. According to Roman law parri-
cidium included the murder of intimate iriends as well as of
parents.

¹4verebere .· vei eor, a religious reverence due to a superior:
pertimesco, an excessive dread of impending calamity.

§18.—-¹quae-loquicur: a fine personification. Note the
1,ραχιῃηῡνονι in tacita—loquitur.

²nullum ι note the emphatic positions of nullum-nullum.

‘'nece-32 alluding to the murders which Catiline perpetrated as
a partisan of Sulla, during the dictatorship os the latter.

⁴sociorum . in 67 B.C. Catiline was propraetor of Africa. In
65 B.C. he was accused by P. Clodius Pulcher, the inveterate
enemy os Cicero, sor cruel oppression of the provincials, but he
succeeded in buying oft the accuser, and the persecution came
to nothing.

Qec—valuisti ε “ you had power enough not only to disregard
the judicial trials, but also to subvert them and weaken their
power.'' Distinguish jue, what the law ordains, or the obliga-
tions it imposes, from lex, a written statute or ordinance.
—qaaestiones .· the praetor urbanus and praetor pereqrinus
dispensed justice in private and less important cases. In case of
any magnitude the people acted as jury themselves, or appointed
one or more to preside at the trial. Those appointed were
called quaesitores or quaestores. In 150 B.C. four permanent
praetors were appointed to aid the praetor urbanus and praetor
peregimus. One had charge of all cases of extortion ς another,
of bribery ; another, of treason; another, os srauds against the

public treasury. These four classes of trials were called quaes-
tiones perpetu-ae.

superiora: “former acts os yours.”

⁸nunc--feremloemi: “ but now that I should be wholly on your
account the slave of sear, that in every, even the least rumour,
Catiline should be dreaded, that no plot seems possible to be
entered into, in which your villany has no share (these things, Ι
say), are not to be endured.”—eotam: fem: referring to patriam.

'ne—opprimar z scil. discede, atque hunc milii timorem eripe.

 

