  
      
   
   
     
   
   
     
    
   
   
   
   

   

,40 nores,

another incredible act of guilt?'' It is said that Catiline

poisoned his first wife and murdered his own son, to marry
Aurelia Orestilla.

³patior: “I suffer myself :'’ a kind of middle form: cp.
ylorz'or, vescor, vertor, lavor.—ta-nti—a'mmanitas2 ‘⁴ so enor-
mous a crime.''

⁵ quas-senties: “which you will find wholly threaten you
on the next Ides. '' On the ides it was usual to pay interest on
borrowed money, cp. Hor. Ep. 2. The ides (idas, from
iduare, to divide) were on the 13th os—each mouth, except in
March, May, July, October, when they sell on the 15th. As
this oration was delivered on the 8th, Catiline had only five
days to prepare against bankruptcy. Decline idus? What
words are sem. of 4th decl. ?

“ael-pertinent : “to these I come, which concern not the
personal disgrace which attaches to your vices, (which concern)
not the embarassment and scandal of your home, but (which
concern) the welsare of the state and the life and safety of us all.''
—iqnominictm : referring to his personal crimes—difficultatem .·
his financial difficulties.

ἓ 15. lcum scias .· sor subjunctive: H. 522, II. 2.
²neminem ε decline this word.

³priclie—Jan-uam42· .· scil ante z ‘⁴ on the day before the Kal·
ends ofJanuary‚'’ i.e. December 31st‚ Sallust gives an account
of this earlier conspiracy. The plan was to murder the consuls
in the capitol, then Catiline and Autronius were to seize the con—
sular power. Suetonius says that both Crassus and Caesar were
partners in guilt, and that the scheme sailed because Crassus did
not appear at the proper time. A second time (5th February)
an attempt was made, but t-his also failed in consequence· of
Catiline having given the signal too soon before a sufficient num-
·ber of followers had arrived.

4Lepido ec Tullo consulibus: M. AEmilius Lepidus and L.
Volcatius Tullus were consuls 66 B.C. The consules ‹lesrynati
were P. Autronius Paetus and P. Cornelius Sulla ι but these
were disqualified for bribery and L. Aurelius Cotta and L.
Manlius Torquatius (their accusers) obtained the consulship.

“comitio: distinguish comiciam and comitia. Where was the
comitium? nicenam—paravisse? scil, potestne—scias: “that
you collected a gang to slay the consuls and leading men 01 the
state Ρ

“gadars—obstinans? “that no reflection or sear of yours‚ but
the good luck 0' the state thwarted your wicked and srenzied
attempt l '' Is aliquis commonly used in negative clauses?

    
    

 

