ι

Nom-ns, 45

adViSed catiline t0 go into exile, preferring- that he should take
ξῖἲῑίἲὴεῧῗῐξῗε rather than that they should have an open conflict

&fibi-decreverit z “ shall decree by their vote.’' The senators
voted “ yea '’ or ‘⁴ nay ” by saying placet or non placet.

⁵‹cl›horret—moribzce: “is inconsistent with my character.''
l'he sact is the Senate could not pass a sentence of exile.

“si—effectas: ‘⁶ if it is this word (exile) you are waiting sor.''

maneantur—tacent : i.e.‚ they suffer me to use this hold lan·
guage to you and still they raise no word on your behalf.

Quid—perspicis? “why do you wait sor the sentence of
{iiiiiet >in words, where will you perceive, though they are

§zu—llmic: “who is present.'' P. Sestius-Gallus was
quaestor to the consul Antonius who as tribunus plebis in 57
stc. was active sor Cicero’s recall from banishment. Cicero
defended him in 56 B.C. in an action de υἱ.

‘²vim—-z‘ntulz'33etz ‘⁴ would have laid violent hands on me ε ”
a speeies os hendiadys. Even his dignity as consul, and the
sacred shrine of Juppiter Stator would not have shielded him.

³quiesczmt probant ε paciuntur, decernunt ε tacent, clamant:
note these examples of oxymoron.

“cives, scil. idem faciunt i.e. silencio probant. The equites
formed the second or middle order of the Roman State.

‘’pro-sequantur: those who went into voluntary exile were
often accompanied to the gates by their friends. An escort is
promised Catiline to express the delight in getting rid os him.

OHAPTER IX.

§22.—¹quamquam: cp. καίτοι ; “and yet,'' used here as a
corrective particle.

²86 3 scil. sperandumne sit fore ut: “is it to be expected that
anything will break your resolve ?'’ Note the emphatic posi·
tions of te, tu, ta, tu. What feelings do these interrogations
ex ιῖιῗῗιςιῖε dent: often used in religious formulas. Give the
construction os utinam: H., 483, 1.

*animum induxeris: Cicero uses the form animum inducere
(except in Pro Sulla, 30, 83) and Livy always in animum in-

ducere .
4

 

