No'ms.

CHAPTER V111.

ἕ 19. —limpecrarez “to obtain its request :'’ i.e. ut ew urbe
exeas.

Quid? quod: see note 16, ς 11.

³in custodiam: when a person of rank was suspected of any
treasonable act, he generally surrendered himself into the hands
of some responsible person, to be guarded until his guilt or
innocence was established. This was called custodia libera.

- *apud M ' : another reading is ad M. The person was

Manius (not Marcus) Lepidus who held the office of consulship
with Volcatius Tullus ΒΕ. 68.

domi meae ἐ would domi with other adjectives be allowable ?

⁵e'sdem parietibus: here the idea of means is combined with
that of place: H. 425, Η., Ι.ι).

qui-essem-:quippe qui—essem: “inasmuch as I was in
great danger.'’

quod—contineremur z when does quod take the indicative and
when the subjunctive: H. 516, I., 11. Ρ

“sodalem “ your boon companion :'' distinguish socius (root
sec, to follow, hence sequor), a follower: consor-5, a partner in
lot z· come-s, a companion on a journey: sodalis, a boon corn-
panion.

'‘virmn optimum: probably ironical: nothing is known of
him, except that he was weak and simple.

‘'videlicet and scilicet: “no doubt :'' both introduce an ex-
planation with the difference, that the former generally indicates
the true, the latter, the wrong explanation, though sometimes,
as in the present passage, the meanings are reversed. Z. 345.

”ad vindicandum : “in bringing you to punishment.''

a vinculis: the state prison which was used to detain pris-
onerS, not for penal imprisonment in opposition to (custodia
libera) private custody.

¹⁰‹1ai = quippe qui ι Η., 517.

ἓ 20. —lquae cum ita sint : see note.
²emori: another reading is morari, antithetical to abire.

⁸reser ad senatum: “bring up (the matter scil. rem) before
the Senate.’'—reserre is the technical term ιο express the iaying
of the subject for debate before the Senate, which was done by
the consul or presiding magistrate: deseree, denotes the simple
announcement of anything: placere, is the usual term to ex-
press the decision οί the Senate. The aristocratic party had

 

