1.er oF οιοεκο. 3

ed the His Country.'’ Deserted by his friends, and exposed

object , to the hatred of his soes, Cicero went to Thessalonica

ere he into voluntary exile. The wauton destruction of his qus inco
lemic, villas and the insults offered to his wife and children ἓέιιὲζρ,
reans, soon, however, produced a leeling of sympathy sor

r and the exiled orator. His return to Rome was attended Recazc,
·nding with all the pomp and circumstance of a triumphant ⁵¹ ΕΟ·
etum· general. Hencel'orth his voice was little heard in the

career Senate. After his return he was appointed to a seat Elected

‚ and in the C ollege qf Augure. In obtaining this office he &haggi
erm of had placed himself under obligations to both Pompey

of the and Caesar, and this may account for his neutrality

s their in the civil struggles of the time. He was subse·
1uently quently appointed, much against his will, proconsul ssrffsssttl‚
0 was os Cilicia, where his administration was marked by ” ’ '
cause, the same integrity as he had displayed in Sicily.
m the .. Cicero arrived in Italy from Cilicia on the 4th os

val he January‚ ΒΕ. 49, just alter the breaking out os the

office, civil war between Pompey and Caesar. After some

in de- hesitation he decided to take the part of Pompey, Sideswith
invest > but his support was never cordial : it was a source ofPompey.
radatic weakness rather than of strength. When the battle
musul- of Pharsalia decided the tate of the Roman world, he Pharsalia,
,late is returned to Brundisium to await the arrival of the B.G.l,8.
to sub· , victorious Caesar, who generously extended a sull
S frus. and srank pardon to the vacillating orator. Cicero ζαὲᾷθζῑθᾰ
gro had from this time withdrew from active public lise and υ ‘man
{uickly devoted himself to philosophy, except during the
:atiline period immediately preceding his death. The loss of
Ῑοᾱὶῃς, his daughter Tullia, the divorce os his wife Terentia,
211wh0 and the unhappy marriage with Publilia darkened
:itizeng the gloom which settled on his declining years. His Gloom.

The high exultation on the assassination of Caesar was of

⁷ of the only momentary duration, and was succeeded by dark
le that forebodings of Marc Anthony's designs. As soon as

,ther 0f the plans of the scheming triumvir were evident,

,
Ξῑ

 

