. in the
sly.
sura ε

z cp.

ι’ cives,

    

ht are
ness in
1 t this

th non·-

ms '' ε

 

NOTES. 5 1

²onmium—erupic : a pregnant construction as if he had meant ι

’ “ all these crimes have been a·ripening up to, and the continued

career of srenzy and boldness have burst lorth in, the time of my
consulship.'' The metaphoris probably borrowed from an ulcer‚
bursting when ripe. ’

³⁴0AE tanto latrocinio=eae tot latronum numero, latrocinium =
latrones, cp. servitium--servi .· conjuratio:conjurati—residebit.-
the metaphor is taken firm a subtle poison in the system. The
state is looked upon by the orator as the body, the conspiracy as
the sever, and the execution of Catiline as the draught of cool
water which momentarily refreshes.

&visceribus z viscera were the upper vitals‚ including the beart,
lungs, liver, &c z intestina, were the liver vitals„ Observe the
force of atque and the repetition os the preposition.

Qum-jactantur .· there is no hendiadys here, but merely an
accumulation of synonymous terms. Observe the middle force
osjactantur : “ toss themselves about.''

“mm-int .· Madvig reads biberunt.
qun‘ est .· ‘⁶ which existS.''—relevatus .· “ mitigated.'’

⁸vekementius—inmovescet: “shall become more chronic if
the others are allowed to live’' z vivis νεῑίραίθ : abl. abs.

§32.——¹proetoris urbani: L. Valerius Flaccus was Praetor
Urbanus at this timc, and the partisans of Catiline thronged
agogziscelshgs} gggtlmal to intimidate him when delivering judgment

&baiulare—cariam: “to beset the senate house in arms.''
Romi-'us divided the people into three tribes (tribus) and each
tribe was divided into ten wards (curioe). Each curia had a
temple sor the performance of its religious rites and for holding
political meetings: the root is cur: “to be powersul ;'' cp.
QuiriteS, hence, ‘⁴ the powerful men'' ε κύριος, κοίρανος-σαπῇ,
ι([ίαιῖἱὶε -- armati.

malleolos: properly malleolus, is “ ahammer‚'' the tranverse
head of which was formed sor holding pitch and tow. These
latter were set on fire and thrown slowly that they might not be
enggUsshecii to ignite houses and other buildings. Translate
‘⁴ re-darts.

*maid-senciat: “what his sentiments are respecting the state: ”
dep. quest.-pollice0r—fore z what verbs are construed with the
future infinitive?

⁵pcetet‘acca—-oppre83az note the balancing of these words, and
the asyndeton.

