er of
who
the

r the
B. C .
cipio
202 .
‘es in

carry
h his
The

sulto
thers
nlute.
B. C.
ty of
Both
ut to

y the
id C.

'VS ac
'Uero Ξ

'dtu m ’

ration

:oned v

you,
:tim ἐ

ρίο-
t the
o the

mous

,mxi-2 &fis-&2514 &sarmatae-«1 &Rae-‚3552 ἕξ 2411. *est-³*

“we-³ wsuhr-‹1w2usta1-suszm2maer-*2* »

uorsa. 31

ς 5.-¹castra—collocata ι “ a camp is pitched,” at Faesulae
(now Fiesole), which lies on a spur os the western slope of the
Appenffies, not sar from Florence. At this place Manlius had
collected a number os soldiers who had served under Sulla.
ξ 7. The term fauces, literally “jaws,'' is osten used sor a
mountain passz cp. Scott: Lady of the Lake: “Led slowly
through the pass‘s Jaws.'’

2ιἰι dies singulos : “daily‚'’ always joined to some word of
comparative force and expressing daily increase or diminution z
cottidie, simply daily repetition.—imperatorem ducemque: impe-
rator, a military leader deriving his authority from the Senate:
dux, simply a leader.

1ἰιιίινο in Senatu: ‘⁸ in the very Senate,'' or as Zumpt (ἓ 737)
takes it, ‘⁴ nay more‚'’ “ nay even in the Senate,''—jam ε “ now
at once.''-jusser0: the fut. pf. osten represents the speedy ac·
complishment os a sut. action.

⁵credo: used ironically: cp. οἴομαι. Here the word may be
equivalent to nou erit verendum.

⁶vet-endum mihi, etc.: “1 shall have to sear (i.e. Ι am con-
vinced) that all patriots will regard your death as occuring
too late, rather than as too severe and cruel,'' or as Wilkin's
translates: ‘⁸ Certainly it is more likely that all patriots will
consider this action too late, than that anyone should consider
it too cruel.'’ Explain quisquam. ’

⁷ccrte—adducor: ‘⁴ sor a certain reason, Ι am not yet ledto
<lo :'’ i.e. the sear os punishing Catiline before his guilt was sully
ascertained lest he might pass sor an injured man with his
sympathizer's. Cicero's object was to cause Catiline and his
associates to leave Rome. ’

⁸interficiere: i.e. “you will ordered to be put to death.''
Others read interficiam te. ·

9ιιιί similis ε similis in Cicero generally takes genitive or dative
of persons ε ᾀαίὶυε os things, · . ⁶ ·
² quc = ut ast “ as not to consess that lt was Justly tnflrcted;³'—

id, i.e. te interficiam from interficiere before.
ἓ 6.—¹qutsquam: for use, see H. 457.

²multis-——oppressus ε ⁶· beset by many powersul guards placed
by me :'' note the idiom. Cicero had guards placed not only
tn the capital, but also throughout Italy.

’te commovere ι’ “to make any sarther movement :'' 'a meta,-
phor taken from the gladiatorial contests. ⁷

⁴fecerunt = speculati sunt et custodiver unt: the verb sacia, in
Latin, and ποιιώ in Greek, and do in English. are osten used as
substitutes sor other verbs.

