   
  
  
    
    
   
  
   

NOTES.

dicam and answering it by immo. According to Madvig. (ἓ η

454) immo corrects a former statement as being quite inaccurate,
or too ‘Keak' though true as far as it goes.-—immo vero .· “ nay,
indeed.

²in senatum venit .· as vir praetorius Catiline had a right to
enter the Senate.

³netat et destgnat .· a metaphor from the marking of the animals
appointed sor sacrifice. Cicero osten uses synonymous words to
impress the idea more strongly-2 “he marks and stamps each
one of us for slaughter :'’ cp. Leg. Man. 3, 7. Cives Romanos
necandos trucidandosque denotavit.

*viri sortes .· ironical.

⁵71tde7nu7¹,„scil. nobis: “ we fancy that we are doing our duty
to tie state.

⁶st'-v1'temus.· for the subj. in protasis, and indic. in apodosis‚
see H. 511.

hul mortem—opportebat: “to death long ago, O Catiline,
ought you to have been dragged by the order of theconsul ?''
Note the emphatic position of ad mortem—duci: for the pre-
sent inf: see. Η., 5 37, L--jussu consulis: the Senate had en-
trusted the safety of the State by the decretum ultimum (videant
consules, ne quid detrimenti respublica capiat). By the power
vested in the consuls in consequence of this decree they had the
power to put Catiline to death.

' ⁸in te-maclzinaris .· “ On you should that ruin long—since
have been hurled which you for a long time have been plotting
against us all.'' Join jampridem from the previous clause with
conferri. The present tense in Latin with jamdiu includes past
tense z cf. πάλαι λέγω, jamdiu dico : “ Ι have long ago told
you and do so still.''-maclzinari ; μηχανᾶσθαι, to plan by artsal
and secret means z moliri, to plan by strong effort.

ἓ 3. ¹An vero: the original force os an is “or‚' and when
used interrogatively the sentence is elliptical. Here we may
supply: “AmxI right in my conjecture, or, in fact, did that
illustrious man, Ρ. Scipio, chief pontiff, though filling no
magistracy, slay Tiberius Gracchus when slightly disturbing the
settled order of the State.'' We may conveniently translate
here an vero by: ‘⁶ while, in fact.’' The argument here is a
nu'nore ad majus. P. Cornelius S„‘.pio Nasica consul with D.
Junius Brutus 138 B.C. Cicero probably adds pontifex maxi-
mus to remind his hearers of the high dignity and prudence
which a man gifted with this office would possess. He also
uses privatus because in contrast to consules, the office of
pontifi’x maximus not being a mgistratus. Tiberium Grac-

7

 

 

    
       
   
           
         
         
      
    

