   
       
    
     

ιε, suetus.

ommit an
n observ-
n opposi—

  

of show-

ulffllla 7η

e, not to

  

ted these
,rease the
the plans
ig in the

momada. ·

) seek to
²tlling the
ari) their

the help

:d him to

:uper-ari ?
351ve.

vere prac-
ι mpleoeas, ’

  
   
    
    
     

·eading is ’

NOTES. 49

”mactari : the official word of sacrifice, “to slay a victim.'’
Itis connected with old verb mayere .· probably “to strike :”
ep, μάχη, hence “to kill.''

§28.—¹candem: cp. note 1, ἓ 1. Cicero shews that neither
Hrecedgntiliggr lawe, nor the judgment os future generations
etei· a .

²At : introduces the objection of an opponent : ‘⁴ Yes, butJ'
Cicero refers here to the case of P. Scipio Nasica who headed
the nobility against Tib. Gracchus,

³azc1 loyes? Principally the legyes Valeriae and [eyes Porciae.
The former were proposed by (1) P. Valerius Poplicola 509
B.C. which enacted that no Roman magistrate should put to
death or flog a Roman citizen if he had appealed to the people :
(2) in 449 B.C. Ε. Valerius Potitus enacted that no magistracy
should be held with an exemption from appeal: (3) in 300 B.C.
M. Valerius Corvus brought in a bill sanctioning the other laws
on the subject of appeal. The leyes Porciae were proposed by
three of the Porcii, and exempted from stripes the persons of
Roman citizens, and imposed heavy fines on any one who should
scourge or kill a Roman citizen.

*roqcaae sunt: “have been passedff' The people at the
comitia were ask-ecl to pass a law by the presiding magistrate in
the words “velitle, jubeatis, Qun-&esst Hence royare leqem,
“to pass a bill.'' NVhen the people voted two ballots were
usually given them, one marked with the letters U R (i.e. uti
royas or “ yea '')‚ and the other with A (i.e. ιιηιὶιμιο, antiqua
probo, “ I annul '')‚

⁵praeclaram qratiam ι “ a fine return :'' strongly ironical.

‘mominem—coquinent ε i.e. hominem novum ε the Romans
applied the term (novas homo) to the first os a family who had
raised himself to a consul office. tam mcuare ε the Iex annalis
enacted that no one could obtain the qaaecorsltip till he was 31 ;
the aedilesliip till 37 ; the praetor-ship till 41 ; and the consulship
till 43. Cicero means that he obtained these offices as soon as
he was eligible to hold them.

[hippagr invidiam: “because of too disqnieting sear of un·
popu ari y.

ἓ 29.——1num-pertimescemia ? “Is the ill-will arising from
a strict and a firm discharge ol' dnty to be fearcd rather than that
arising srom indolence and indifference.'’

